---
comments: true
---

# Section 6.4. The science of intelligence

[英文原文↗](https://cis.temple.edu/~pwang/GTI-book/GTI-CH6/GTI-6-4.html)

[🔙上一级](./index.md)

## Need for a new theory

"Intelligence" is not a new concept at all. The psychological study on human intelligence has accumulated many results, and there are also related research in education, anthropology, philosophy, and so on. Though there is still no consensus on what the essence of intelligence is, the focus is on the mental capability that distinguish human beings from other known objects in the universe, and the concept is closely related to concepts like "cognition", "thinking", and "mind". Though people also talk about the intelligence of animals and of communities, and acknowledge the possibility of alien/extraterrestrial intelligence, human intelligence remains the most example of intelligence.

The study of artificial intelligence fundamentally changes the research on intelligence by providing a platform on which various theories can be tested. With programmable computers, each theory on intelligence, as far as it is concretely spelled out, can guide the building of artificial systems that do exactly what the theory specified as "intelligence".

Therefore, a theory of intelligence in general should cover intelligent systems that are either naturally exist or artificially built. On one hand, it should be a _descriptive_ theory of _natural_ intelligence, by providing a summary and explanation about the related observation in various domains. On the other hand, it should be a _prescriptive_ theory of _artificial_ intelligence, by providing principles and instructions about how to build systems that can be described as "intelligent". In this way, a general theory of intelligence involves both science and engineering. It should give us a better understanding about intelligence, as well as produce new technology to better meet our needs.

No existing theory can serve the above purpose. The existing descriptive theories of intelligence (such as psychology and education) basically taking "intelligence" to mean "human intelligence", and rarely attempt to separate the human-independent aspects of intelligence from its human-specific ones, or even think such a separation is possible. The related prescriptive theories (such as computer science and traditional artificial intelligence) basically taking "intelligence" to mean "problem-solving capability", and rarely attempt to separate the intelligent approaches of problem-solving from unintelligent ones, or even think such a separation is possible.

## Structure of the theory

To cover intelligence in general, the theory should start by given "intelligence" a proper working definition. Among the naturally existing systems, this definition should draw a line between the intelligent and unintelligent ones that is roughly consistent with the everyday usage of the word. For artificially built systems, this definition should set up a relatively sharp criteria for systems to be qualified as intelligent, as well as to show why conventional computer systems are not intelligent yet. The definition should neither be too narrow as to only include a special type of intelligence (such as human intelligence), not too broad as to include all existing computer systems.

Based on the working definition, the theory should gradually introduce notions, principles, structures, mechanisms, and conclusions that are both consistent with our understanding of natural intelligence and instructive for the building of artificial intelligence. Whenever possible, the conclusions should be concrete enough to be formalized, though the theory as a whole is an empirical theory, not a formal theory (see [Section 6.3](./6.3.md)).

The theory should be organized, and gradually introduce its contents. Its notions should be as clear and well-defined as possible, as well as be self-consistent. The theory should be as simple as possible, and without any unnecessary details. Whenever assumptions are needed, they should be explicitly introduced and justified, rather than be smuggled in.

The theory should not attempt to cover domains that are not directly related to intelligence (according to its working definition). Especially, a theory of intelligence will not replace any part of psychology or computer science, though may cooperate with them.

The theory should address the existing problems in AI, rather than only discuss the problems introduced by itself. However, given its different basic assumptions, its solutions are not necessarily in the form expected by the traditional theories. Especially, it may dismiss certain problems as beyond the scope of a theory of intelligence. On the problems it does solve, its solution should be specified to the level that can be directly implemented using existing technology.

## Evaluation of theories

When multiple theories on intelligence are proposed, they should be compared and evaluated according to the following criteria, which come from the above discussion and [Section 6.2](./6.2.md):

* **Characteristic**: This theory should identify a scope that has not been covered by an existing theory. If what is call "theory of intelligence" ends up talking about the same thing as cognitive psychology, computer science, or statistical modeling, then it is just a new _label_, rather than a new _theory_. Of course, the new theory will have partial overlaps with existing theories here or there, but it must have something unique in its basic notions.
* **Correct**: The conclusions of the theory must be consistent with our current understanding about various types of intelligence, especially human intelligence. According to the discussion in [Section 6.3](./6.3.md), this theory should describe the human mind at a more abstract level than psychology and biology (though many of its ideas may come from them), in a language that is not restricted to human intelligence.
* **Concrete**: The conclusions of the theory must be applicable for the engineering design of AI systems. Usually, first a formal model is built, interpreted, and justified by the theory, then the model is implemented in computer software and/or hardware to become systems that are fully intelligent according to the theory.
* **Compact**: The theory should be conceptually simple and clear, as well as structurally well-designed, so as to be efficiently communicated, evaluated, and applied.

Most proposed theories do not satisfy the above requests.

Mainstream AI research has been too strongly influenced by computer science and mathematics. After failing to capture "intelligence" as a whole by notions like "computation" and "algorithm", the research has turned to domain-dependent and problem-specific tools. Consequently, the field of "AI" runs into an identity crisis, since it cannot indicate what it can contribute that is not already covered by computer science. At the same time, the "AI systems" built in this way are usually as rigid and brittle as conventional computer systems, though useful and powerful for certain limited purpose.

There are other, often "biologically inspired", theories of intelligence. They usually aim at the flexibility and adaptivity of the systems, rather than their built-in problem-solving capability. However, in them very often "biologically inspired" becomes "biologically justified", in that they take "the human way" as "the only way" to achieve intelligence, and consequently attempt to simulate the biological mechanism or process (the human brain or its evolution process) as closely as possible. Though such research will greatly contribute to our understanding of that biological mechanism or process, the computer models are actually "artificial human intelligence" or "artificial evolution", not "artificial intelligence" (though related to it). Such a limited vision of intelligence will not lead us to a truly _general_ theory of intelligence.

There are many theories that lack a clear internal structure. Instead, they are more like collections of judgments, with contradiction and redundancy. They often fail to tell AI researchers what to do to build intelligent systems, or assume highly idealized situations that can be satisfied neither in natural systems nor in artificial systems.

Like in other branches of science, we cannot expect a perfect theory of intelligence, though we can expect one that is better than the existing theories, as explained in [Section 6.3](./6.3.md).

## This book is such a theory

The theory presented in this book is exactly an attempt to satisfy the above requirements.

This theory proposes a working definition of intelligence, which is relatively simple and sharp, and it captures the following common beliefs:

* Human has the highest intelligence among everything we know so far.
* Some animals are more intelligent that others.
* It makes sense to talk about the intelligence of a community.
* The existence of alien intelligence remains a possibility.
* Conventional computers and other machines are not intelligent.

The theory introduces some notions by which the internal and external activity of all types of intelligent systems can be described.

Based on the working definition of intelligence, a concrete model, NARS, is described at the conceptual level, with its internal design, dynamic process, and external activities. This model unifies many processes and mechanisms that are traditionally studied and reproduced in isolation. In the discussions, many problems in artificial intelligence and cognitive sciences are addressed in a consistent manner.

This theory provides a new understanding of the essence of intelligence, as well as guidance on how to build thinking machines.
